Oprah:  TODAY ON "SUPER SOUL SUNDAY,"
MY CONVERSATION CONTINUES
WITH MY GREATEST  SPIRITUAL TEACHER.
THAT WAS  LIFE-CHANGING FOR ME.
YES, DARLING.
THE LEGENDARY AUTHOR,  THINKER, POET,
AND MY PERSONAL MENTOR,  DR. MAYA ANGELOU.
I HAVE TO SAY,  I DON'T BELIEVE ANYBODY ON EARTH
HAS TAUGHT ME  MORE THAN MAYA ANGELOU.
I WAS  CRYING HYSTERICALLY,
AND YOU SAID,  "STOP IT, RIGHT NOW."
TODAY, SHE'S BACK  WITH EVEN MORE OF HER WISDOM.
WHAT DO YOU THINK IS
THE BEST PCE OF ADVICE  YOU'VE GIVEN?
HMM.
SHE REVEALS HOW HER TOUGH
BUT TENDERHEARTED MOTHER
TRANSFORMED HER LIFE.
EVEN AT 16,  WHEN YOU BECAME PREGNANT,
SHE DID NOT SHAME YOU.  NOT AT ALL.
AND I GOT TO SAY THIS
NOBODY HAS  BETTER INSIGHT AND PERSPECTIVE
ABOUT AGING BRILLIANTLY.
WHAT CAN YOU SAY  ABOUT THE 80s?
IS IT STILL HOT?  OH, MY GOODNESS.
DO IT, IF YOU CAN.
[ LAUGHS ]
PLUS, THE AHA MOMENT  THAT MOVES MAYA TO TEARS.
IT STILL HUMBLES ME,
AND I'M AMAZED AT IT.
GET READY FOR LIFE LESSONS
AND TO BE INSPIRED
AS ONLY MAYA ANGELOU  CAN DELIVER.
[ LAUGHS ]  THANK GOD FOR THIS.
THAT'S A TWEET.
PART 2 OF  MY HEART-TO-HEART CONVERSATION
WITH THE  PHENOMENAL  MAYA ANGELOU
STARTS NOW.
Oprah:    I WANTED A PLACE FOR PEOPLE
TO GO EVERY SUNDAY TO WAKE UP.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING...
OH, YOU COULDN'T  HAVE SAID THAT BETTER.
...EYE-OPENING, AND INSPIRING.
THIS IS MY FAVORITE THING  TO TALK ABOUT.
THIS WILL LIFT YOU RIGHT ON UP.
IT'S FOOD FOR YOUR SOUL.
EVERY SINGLE SUNDAY.
THIS IS "SUPER SOUL SUNDAY."
LAST TIME, MAYA ANGELOU AND I  REMINISCED ABOUT
SOME OF THE  MOST MEANINGFUL MOMENTS
OF HER EXTRAORDINARY JOURNEY.
WOULD YOU SAY THAT YOU'VE HAD  A LIFE FILLED WITH PIZZAZZ?
YES, I HAVE.
TALK ABOUT PIZZAZZ.
WE MARVELED AT MAYA
IN THIS 1957  CALYPSO SHOWSTOPPER.
MY LORD.  [ LAUGHS ]
AND SHE GAVE US  NEW INSIGHT INTO
BOUNDLESS ACCOMPLISHMENTS  IN HER REMARKABLE LIFE.
WHAT WERE YOU THINKING  WHEN
THE PRESIDENT PLACED THAT MEDAL  AROUND YOUR NECK?
I WAS SO FILLED THAT,
WHEN I WAS  TAKEN OUT OF THAT ROOM,
I SOBBED IN GRATITUDE.
SHE ALSO  SPOKE CANDIDLY AND LOVINGLY
ABOUT HER MOTHER, VIVIAN BAXTER,
A CHARISMATIC, FIERCE,  DYNAMO OF A WOMAN.
[ LAUGHS ]
I WOULDN'T MESS WITH  VIVIAN BAXTER.
NO, NEVER.  YOU DO NOT MESS WITH HER.
NEVER.
THEIR  DEEP SPIRITUAL CONNECTION
IS THE CATALYST  FOR MAYA'S LATEST BOOK.
IT'S CALLED "MOM & ME & MOM."
AT 85, MAYA ANGELOU  IS NOW A GREAT GRANDMOTHER
AND IS STILL  TAKING THE WORLD BY STORM.
IN ADDITION TO HER WRITING
AND FULL SCHEDULE  OF SPEAKING ENGAGEMENTS,
SHE REMAINS EVER RELEVANT,  HIP, AND UP-TO-DATE
WITH HER ACTIVE AND ENLIGHTENING  PRESENCE ON TWITTER.
I'M ONE OF LEGIONS OF READERS  WHO LOOK TO MAYA ANGELOU
FOR COMFORTING WORDS,  FOR COURAGE.
WE SOAK UP HER WISDOM,  WE MARVEL AT HER STAMINA,
AND BASK IN  THE PURE, CONTAGIOUS JOY
SHE TAKES IN LIVING.
Angelou: 82 IS HOT.
82 IS FABULOUS.
I THOUGHT THAT  THE 60s WERE GOOD.
I THOUGHT  THE 60s WERE THE HOTTEST EVER,
AND THEN I GOT INTO THE 70s.
WHAT?
I LOVED THE 70s.
AND I THOUGHT, "WELL, THE 80s  IS GONNA BE SLOWING DOWN."
NOT.
I'M WRITING MUSIC.
I'M WRITING, I'M WORKING,
AND I'M TALKING TO YOU.
OH, YES, 80s  TRY TO MAKE IT.
TRY TO MAKE IT TO 80.
[ LAUGHING ]  IT'S TRUE.
IT'S TRUE?  ABSOLUTELY.
NOW, AS WE SIT HERE,  YOU'RE 85.
YES, MA'AM.  YES, AS WE ARE 85.
WHAT CAN YOU SAY  ABOUT THE 80s?
IS IT STILL HOT?  OH, MY GOODNESS.
DO IT IF YOU CAN.  DO IT IF YOU CAN?
IF YOU HAVE A CHOICE,  CHOOSE THE 80s.
OH, MY GOODNESS.  I MEAN IT.
IF YOU'VE BEEN  CARING FOR YOURSELF,
YOU KNOW,  MODERATION IN ALL THINGS.
AND EVEN  MODERATION IN MODERATION.
DON'T GET  TOO MUCH MODERATION.
[ BOTH LAUGHING ]
THAT'S A TWEET.
"DON'T EVEN GET  TOO MUCH MODERATION.
MODERATION  IN MODERATION."
THAT'S RIGHT.  YES.
BUT WHEN YOU  GET INTO YOUR 80s,
AND YOU FIND THAT YOU'RE STILL  LOOKING KIND OF ALL RIGHT,
AND PEOPLE STILL SAY,  "HELLO, HELLO, HELLO."
[ BOTH LAUGH ]
YOU THINK,  "MM, I'M GLAD I GOT THIS FAR."
YES.
IN THE MAY ISSUE  OF  "O"MAGAZINE,
WE TALK ABOUT  AGING BRILLIANTLY.
TELL ME WHAT YOU'VE LEARNED  YOURSELF ABOUT THE AGING.
YOU KNOW, BECAUSE  I THINK I LEARNED THIS FROM YOU,
AND WHAT A WONDERFUL MENTOR  YOU HAVE BEEN FOR ME
FOR AGING WITH GRACE
AND APPRECIATION AND HEART
AND JUST EMBRACING IT.
AND I SEE  SO MANY WOMEN AROUND ME WHO
EVEN AS EARLY AS THEIR 40s,  AND SOME EVEN IN THEIR 30s,
THEY'RE TRYING TO, YOU KNOW,  BOTOX THEMSELVES,
AND YOU KNOW, CHANGE THEMSELVES,  AND FIGHTING IT.
JUST FIGHTING IT,  FIGHTING IT ALL THE WAY.
AND I ALWAYS LOOK AT IT AS,  JUST AS YOU WERE SAYING,
"MY GOD, WHATEVER AGE,
I THINK ABOUT  THE PEOPLE WHO DIDN'T MAKE IT."
I KNOW.
AS I SIT HERE AT 59,  I THINK ABOUT
ALL THE PEOPLE  WHO DIDN'T MAKE IT TO 59.
AND SO, WERE YOU EVER  ANXIOUS ABOUT IT?
WERE YOU EVER, "OH,  I CAN'T BELIEVE I'M TURNING 40.
I CAN'T BELIEVE I'M 50."  I CAN'T REMEMBER
EVER BEING ANXIOUS  ABOUT IT,
EVEN WHEN  I WAS VERY YOUNG.
I MEAN, I HAVE ALWAYS  WANTED TO REACH THAT OTHER AGE.
MM-HMM.  AS FAR AS I CAN REMEMBER.
I THOUGHT THAT,  IF I COULD LIVE TO BE 20...
YES.  ...YOU KNOW,
IT WAS GONNA BE  REALLY WONDERFUL.
AND THEN 25.
AND THEN 30?
WHOO.
MY GOODNESS,  I WAS JUST GONNA
IT WAS A KNOCKOUT.
EVERY AGE,  I'VE BEEN GRATEFUL.
I TALKED TO YOU ABOUT THIS  YEARS AGO.
YES. YES.  IS BEING GRATEFUL.
GRATEFUL, JUST CONSTANTLY.
GET UP IN THE MORNING,  "THANK YOU, LORD.
"THANK YOU FOR THIS DAY.
"THANK YOU FOR THE LIGHT  COMING THROUGH THAT WINDOW,
THANK YOU.
"THANK YOU THAT  I'M BREATHING.
"THANK YOU.  THANK YOU FOR EVERYTHING.
"THANK YOU FOR  THE PHONE CALL
"THAT TOLD ME THAT  I HAD THE JOB.
"THANK YOU EVEN  FOR THE PHONE CALL
THAT TOLD ME  I'M NOT WANTED ANY MORE.
"THANK YOU,  BECAUSE I KNOW YOU HAVE
SOMETHING BETTER FOR ME  LINED UP."
YES, YEAH.  "THANK YOU."
ONE OF MY  LIFE SEMINAL MOMENTS,
I HAD THE FARM IN INDIANA.
YOU REMEMBER THE FARM.  YES, I DO.
AND I WAS  IN THE BATHROOM,
BECAUSE THERE WERE  PEOPLE AT THE HOUSE,
AND I CLOSED THE DOOR,
AND I WAS  SITTING ON THE TOILET SEAT.
AND ON THE BATHROOM PHONE  CALLING YOU,
AND I WAS CRYING HYSTERICALLY  ABOUT SOMETHING.
I DON'T REMEMBER  WHAT IT WAS.
AND YOU SAID
YOU KNOW,  I WAS CALLING FOR YOUR
OPEN, EMPATHETIC,
LOVING EMBRACE,
AND YOU SAID, "STOP IT."
THAT'S RIGHT.  "STOP IT RIGHT NOW,
I WANT YOU TO  SAY THANK YOU."
AND I WAS, LIKE,  "BUT YOU DIDN'T HEAR ME.
YOU DIDN'T HEAR  WHAT I SAID."
AND YOU SAID,  "NO, I WANT  SAY IT.
I WANT TO HEAR YOU  SAY IT."
AND I WENT, "THANK YOU.
WHAT AM I  SAYING THANK YOU FOR?"
AND YOU SAID,  "BECAUSE YOU KNOW GOD HAS
PUT A RAINBOW IN THE CLOUDS  FOR YOU."
THAT'S IT.  YEAH.
THAT WAS  LIFE-CHANGING FOR ME.
YES, DARLING.
SO, WHEN WHATEVER IT IS  HITS...
"THANK YOU."  ..."THANK YOU."
BECAUSE I KNOW  SOMETHING BETTER
IS ON THE ROAD FOR ME,
SO, YOU FIRED ME?  GOOD ON YOU.
AND VERY GOOD ON ME,
'CAUSE WHAT I'M GOING TO GET,  DARLING, YOU WOULD LONG FOR.
[ LAUGHS ]
DARLING?  YES, DARLING.
SO, WHERE DID YOU  GET THAT?
WHERE DID YOU KNOW THAT?
OUT FROM A LONG WAY,  FROM MY GRANDMOTHER,
MY FATHER'S MOTHER,  WHO RAISED ME,
AND FROM VIVIAN BAXTER.
MAYA DESCRIBES HER MOTHER,  VIVIAN, AS A DYNAMIC WOMAN,
A SPITFIRE WITH  A LARGER-THAN-LIFE PRESENCE,
BUT SHE WAS SOMEONE  MAYA DIDN'T REALLY GET TO KNOW
UNTIL HER TEENS.
UNABLE TO RAISE  TWO YOUNG CHILDREN ON HER OWN,
VIVIAN BAXTER HAD SENT MAYA  AND HER BROTHER, BAILEY,
TO LIVE WITH THEIR GRANDMOTHER  IN RURAL ARKANSAS.
WHEN MAYA TURNED 13,  SHE REJOINED HER MOTHER
IN SAN FRANCISCO.
AND WHILE IT TOOK SOME TIME FOR  THEM TO GET TO KNOW EACH OTHER,
IT WAS OBVIOUS  THERE WAS A LOT OF LOVE
BETWEEN MAYA  AND THE WOMAN SHE CALLED "LADY."
VIVIAN BAXTER, SHE
SHE LOVED ME.  YES.
AND ENCOURAGED ME  TO DEVELOP COURAGE.
IN STOCKTON, CALIFORNIA,  WHERE SHE LIVED AND DIED,
THERE'S A PARK  NAMED FOR HER
BECAUSE SHE WAS  THAT KIND TO EVERYBODY
WHITES, BLACKS,  SPANISH SPEAKING,
NATIVE AMERICAN, ASIAN.
SHE WAS THAT KIND.
AND SO, THE NEWEST PARK
IN STOCKTON, CALIFORNIA,
IS CALLED  "LADY BAXTER PARK."
I LOVE THAT.  I LOVE THAT.
AND SO,  THAT'S ON ONE END OF TOWN,
AND A LIBRARY  ON THE OTHER END OF TOWN
IS THE MAYA ANGELOU.  MM.
IT'S AMAZING BECAUSE
THE LIBRARY  WAS NAMED FOR ME
BECAUSE OF VIVIAN BAXTER.
YOUR MOTHER  PAVED THAT WAY.
THAT'S RIGHT.  SHE PAVED THAT WAY,
WHICH WE WERE  TALKING ABOUT LAST WEEK.
EVERY TIME  I DARE TO DO A GOOD THING,
I'M DOING IT  IN THE NAME OF MY MOTHER.
COMING UP, MAYA SAYS  IF YOU NEED HEALING,
THERE'S ONE THING  THAT'S GUARANTEED TO HELP.
LOVE DOES THAT.  LOVE DOES THAT.
LOVE LIBERATES.
AND THE TURNING POINT  THAT GAVE MAYA
WHAT SHE CALLS  THE MOST IMPORTANT VIRTUE
COURAGE.
SHE NEVER, EVER  MADE ME FEEL THAT
I HAD  DONE THE WRONG THING.
I KNOW, AND EVEN AT 16,  WHEN YOU BECAME PREGNANT,
SHE DID NOT SHAME YOU.  NOT AT ALL.
"SUPER SOUL SUNDAY"  WILL BE BACK IN A MOMENT.
Oprah: IN HER LATEST MEMOIR,  MAYA ANGELOU SAYS
THE LESSONS FROM HER MOTHER,  VIVIAN BAXTER,
ARE HIGHLIGHTED IN HER MEMORY
LIKE TECHNICOLOR STARS  IN A MIDNIGHT SKY.
Angelou: "MY MOTHER'S  GIFTS OF COURAGE TO ME
"WERE BOTH LARGE AND SMALL.
"THE LATTER ARE WOVEN SO SUBTLY
"INTO THE FABRIC OF MY PSYCHE,
"THAT I CAN HARDLY DISTINGUISH
WHERE SHE STOPS AND I BEGIN."
YOU SAY THAT  THIS BOOK HAS BEEN WRITTEN
TO EXAMINE SOME OF THE WAYS  THAT LOVE HEALS
AND HELPS A PERSON  TO CLIMB TO IMPOSSIBLE HEIGHTS
AND RISE  FROM IMMEASURABLY DEPTHS.
THAT'S TRUE.  YES.
THAT'S TRUE.
LOVE DOES THAT.  LOVE DOES THAT.
LOVE LIBERATES.
AND LOVE FROM A PARENT
AND I MEAN  FROM A MOTHER OR A FATHER
LOVE.
NOT SENTIMENTALITY,  NOT MUSH,
BUT TRUE LOVE.
LOVE THAT  GIVES YOU ENOUGH COURAGE
THAT YOU CAN SAY TO SOMEBODY,  "DON'T DO THAT, BABY,"
AND THE PERSON WILL KNOW
YOU'RE NOT PREACHING,  YOU'RE TEACHING.
YES.
Oprah: MAYA ANGELOU DEVELOPED
AN EVEN DEEPER CONNECTION  TO HER MOTHER
WHEN SHE BECAME PREGNANT AT 16.
SHE CALLS THE BIRTH  OF HER ONLY CHILD, HER SON, GUY,
THE GREATEST BLESSING  OF HER LIFE.
WHEN MAYA TOLD VIVIAN BAXTER  SHE WAS GONNA HAVE A BABY,
HER MOTHER DIDN'T GET ANGRY.
INSTEAD, SHE WELCOMED  THE BABY BOY INTO THEIR LIVES,
EVEN GUIDING THE YOUNG MOTHER  AS SHE STRUCK OUT ON HER OWN.
WHEN GUY WAS  ONLY 2 MONTHS OLD,
YOU MOVED OUT OF  THE HOUSE,
AND I LOVE THE STORY ABOUT  WHAT YOUR MOTHER
SAID TO YOU AS YOU  WERE LEAVING.
SHE SAYS, "ALL RIGHT,  YOU GO, BUT REMEMBER THIS.
"WHEN YOU CROSS MY DOORSTEP,  YOU HAVE ALREADY BEEN RAISED
"WITH WHAT YOU'VE LEARNED FROM  YOUR GRANDMOTHER IN ARKANSAS
"AND WHAT YOU'VE LEARNED  FROM ME.
"YOU KNOW THE DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN RIGHT AND WRONG.
"DO RIGHT,  AND DON'T LET ANYBODY RAISE YOU
"FROM THE WAY  YOU'VE BEEN RAISED.
"KNOW YOU WILL ALWAYS  HAVE TO MAKE ADJUSTMENTS
"IN LOVE RELATIONSHIPS,  IN FRIENDS,
"IN SOCIETY AND WORK,
"BUT DON'T LET ANYBODY  CHANGE YOUR MIND.
"AND THEN REMEMBER THIS
YOU CAN ALWAYS COME HOME."
SHE DID.  OH!
SHE DID, AND SHE   WHENEVER I'D GO HOME,
THE WORLD WOULD  THROW ME FLAT ON MY FACE
WITH THIS LITTLE BABY  I'M TRYING TO RAISE
AND WORK AND SING SONGS  AND DANCE.
AND I WOULD GO HOME  TO VIVIAN BAXTER.
SHE WOULD ACT AS IF THE BEST  THING HAS EVER HAPPENED.
SHE'D CALL HER FRIENDS,  "GIRL, YOU CAN'T BELIEVE IT.
"THE BABY IS HOME.  I'M GONNA COOK THIS FOR HER.
"SHE LOVES SPANISH RICE.  I'M GONNA COOK THAT FOR HER.
"LISTEN,  DON'T TRY TO COME OVER.
"I'M GONNA  HAVE HER TO MYSELF
"FOR AT LEAST  THREE OR FOUR HOURS,
THEN YOU CAN COME OVER."
SHE NEVER, EVER  MADE ME FEEL THAT
I HAD  DONE THE WRONG THING.
I KNOW, AND EVEN AT 16,  WHEN YOU BECAME PREGNANT,
SHE DID NOT SHAME YOU.  NOT AT ALL.
SHE SAID, "WE'RE GONNA  HAVE THIS BEAUTIFUL BABY."
THAT'S RIGHT,  AND SHE ASKED ME.
SHE SAID, "DO YOU KNOW  WHO THE FATHER IS?"
I SAID, "YES.
"I ONLY HAD SEX WITH HIM  ONE TIME,
BUT, THEN,  HE'S THE ONLY ONE."
SHE SAID, "ALL RIGHT. DO YOU  LOVE HIM?" I SAID, "NO."
SHE ASKED ME, "DOES HE  LOVE YOU?" I SAID, "NO."
SHE SAID, "WE'RE NOT GONNA  RUIN THREE LIVES.
WE'RE GONNA  HAVE A BEAUTIFUL BABY."
WOW.  YES, SHE DID.
AND SHE LOVED MY SON.
YES.
SHE WAS A KNOCKOUT,  VIVIAN BAXTER.
SHE WAS A KNOCKOUT.
TELL ME THIS.
YOU'VE BEEN  MY GREATEST TEACHER.
WHO'S BEEN  YOUR GREATEST TEACHERS?
PROBABLY MY GRANDMOTHER  AND MY MOTHER.
REALLY?  MM-HMM.
YOUR GREATEST TEACHERS?  MY GREATEST TEACHERS.
I WATCHED  GRANDMOTHER HENDERSON,
AND I WATCHED  VIVIAN BAXTER.
VIVIAN BAXTER  WITH THIS INCREDIBLE ANGER
WHENEVER ANYBODY  TRIED TO DO HER DOWN.
THIS SAME WOMAN WAS SO KIND,  I NEVER IN MY LIFE
SHE WAS VERY PRETTY.
SHE NEVER  LAUGHED AT ANYBODY.
EVER.
I LIKED THAT IN HER.  UH-HUH.
BECAUSE  SHE HAD EVERYTHING.
SHE HAD MONEY, SHE HAD BEAUTY,  AND HEALTH,
AND SHE NEVER  LAUGHED AT ANYBODY.
AND YOU DIDN'T THINK OF YOURSELF  AS A PRETTY GIRL.
OH, NO.  I WASN'T A PRETTY GIRL.
THERE WERE PRETTY GIRLS  WHO HAD
LONG HAIR AND FAIR SKIN  AND THAT.
AND I WAS SO TALL.
I WAS 6' AT 15.
SO, HOW DID YOU LEARN TO  LOVE YOURSELF AT THAT TIME?
WELL, BAILEY LOVED ME,
MY GRANDMOTHER LOVED ME,
AND MY MOTHER LOVED ME.
BECAUSE ANOTHER BOOK  THAT YOU WROTE, THERE'S A POEM,
"NOBODY MAKES IT ALONE."
NOBODY, BUT NOBODY,  MAKES IT ALONE.
NOBODY MAKES IT   NOBODY MAKES IT ALONE,
AND EVERYBODY  NEEDS SOMEBODY.
AND THAT'S HOW LOVE HEALS.
THE LOVE OF THE FAMILY,
THE LOVE OF ONE PERSON,  CAN HEAL,
SO, IT HEALS THE SCARS LEFT
OR WOUNDS LEFT  BY A LARGER SOCIETY,
A MASSIVE,  POWERFUL SOCIETY.
COMING UP, THE MOMENT  THAT CHANGED MAYA'S LIFE.
IT STILL HUMBLES ME,
AND I'M AMAZED AT IT.
AND GRATEFUL FOR IT.
SUPER SOULERS,  I WANT TO KNOW ABOUT
THE GREATEST TEACHERS  IN YOUR LIVES
AND THE LESSONS  THAT INSPIRED YOU.
TWEET ME USING 23LoveMaya.
OR POST ON FACEBOOK.
THERE'S AN AFRICAN-AMERICAN  SONG, 19th CENTURY,
WHICH IS SO GREAT.
IT SAYS...
♪ ♪  WHEN IT LOOKED LIKE THE SUN ♪ ♪
♪ ♪  WASN'T GONNA SHINE ANYMORE ♪ ♪
♪ ♪  GOD PUT A RAINBOW  IN THE CLOUDS ♪ ♪
IMAGINE.
AND I'VE HAD  SO MANY RAINBOWS IN MY CLOUDS.
I HAD A LOT OF CLOUDS.
BUT I HAVE HAD SO MANY RAINBOWS.
AND THE THING TO DO,  IT SEEMS TO ME,
IS TO PREPARE YOURSELF  SO THAT YOU CAN
BE A RAINBOW  IN SOMEBODY ELSE'S CLOUD.
SOMEBODY  WHO MAY NOT LOOK LIKE YOU,
MAY NOT CALL GOD  THE SAME NAME YOU CALL GOD,
IF THEY CALL GOD AT ALL.
YOU SEE?
AND MAY NOT EAT THE SAME DISHES  PREPARED THE WAY YOU DO,
MAY NOT DANCE YOUR DANCES,
OR SPEAK YOUR LANGUAGE.
BUT BE A BLESSING TO SOMEBODY.
THAT'S WHAT I THINK.
Angelou: "SUPER SOUL SUNDAY"  WILL BE BACK IN A MOMENT.
Angelou: WHAT REALLY MATTERS NOW
IS LOVE.
I MEAN, THAT CONDITION  IN THE HUMAN SPIRIT
SO PROFOUND
THAT IT ALLOWS US TO RISE.
STRENGTH, LOVE,
COURAGE, LOVE,
KINDNESS, LOVE.
THAT IS REALLY WHAT MATTERS.
THERE HAS ALWAYS BEEN EVIL,
AND THERE WILL ALWAYS BEEN EVIL,
BUT THERE HAS ALWAYS BEEN GOOD,
AND THERE IS GOOD NOW.
YOU SAY WORDS ARE THINGS,
AND THAT  THEY'RE SO POWERFUL.
SO, WHAT WORDS DO YOU TURN TO  FOR COMFORT?
LOVE.
AND, AGAIN, SEE,  I DON'T MEAN
I THINK  I THINK LOVE IS
THAT CONDITION  IN THE HUMAN SPIRIT
SO PROFOUND...
THAT IT ALLOWS US TO FORGIVE.  MM-HMM.
AND IT MAY BE THE ENERGY
WHICH KEEPS THE STARS  IN THE FIRMAMENT.
YES.  I'M NOT SURE.
IT MAY BE THE ENERGY  WHICH KEEPS
THE BLOOD RUNNING SMOOTHLY  THROUGH OUR VEINS.
I'M NOT SURE.
BUT IT'S SOMETHING  BEYOND THE EXPLANATION.
IT CAN BE USED FOR  ANYTHING YOU CAN'T EXPLAIN,
ANY GOOD THING  YOU CAN'T EXPLAIN.
ABSOLUTELY.
YES, MA'AM.
WHERE DO YOU GO  FOR SOLACE, FOR COMFORT?
ARE THERE  BOOKS THAT YOU READ?
WHEN MAYA ANGELOU  NEEDS COMFORTING,
WHAT DO YOU USE?
I'M A STUDENT OF UNITY,
AND THERE'S  A BOOK CALLED
THE UNITY CHURCH?  UNITY CHURCH.
Oprah: MAYA FIRST DISCOVERED  THE UNITY CHURCH IN HER 20s
AFTER HER VOICE COACH  AND MENTOR, FRED WILKERSON,
INVITED HER TO A SERVICE THERE.
FOUNDED IN 1889,  UNITY IS A CHRISTIAN MOVEMENT
THAT EMPHASIZES  AFFIRMATIVE PRAYER AND EDUCATION
AS A PATH TO SPIRITUALITY.
I TOOK A COURSE IN UNITY  ABOUT TWO YEARS AGO ONLINE.
NOT TO BECOME  A MEMBER OR MINISTER,
BUT JUST TO  UNDERSTAND MORE DEEPLY.
THERE'S A BOOK CALLED  "LESSONS IN TRUTH."
WOW.  AND IN THE BOOK,
THERE'S A LINE WHICH IS,  "GOD LOVES ME."
AND WHEN I CAME TO READ IT  TO MY THEN-MENTOR,
FREDERICK WILKERSON,
THE LATE  FREDERICK WILKERSON,
I READ, "GOD LOVES ME."
AND HE SAID,  "READ IT AGAIN."
I SAID,  "GOD LOVES ME."
HE SAID, "READ IT AGAIN."  MM.
"READ IT AGAIN."
AND FINALLY, I SAID,  "GOD...LOVES...ME."
[ SIGHS ]
IT STILL HUMBLES ME,
THAT THIS FORCE WHICH MADE
LEAVES AND FLEAS  AND STARS
AND RIVERS AND YOU
LOVES ME.
ME, MAYA ANGELOU.
IT'S AMAZING!
I CAN DO ANYTHING   AND DO IT WELL.
ANY GOOD THING,  I CAN DO IT.
THAT'S WHY  I AM WHO I AM. YES.
BECAUSE GOD LOVES ME,  AND I'M AMAZED AT IT!
AND GRATEFUL FOR IT.
DO YOU FEEL CARRIED  BY THE ANCESTORS AS I DO?
DO YOU FEEL CARRIED BY THEM?  ABSOLUTELY.
WHEN YOU SAID, WHEN WE  TALKED LAST WEEK ABOUT,
"YOUR CROWN  HAS BEEN PAID FOR.
PUT IT ON YOUR HEAD  AND WEAR IT."
YES.  YEAH.
DO YOU FEEL
DO YOU FEEL THAT  YOUR GRANDMOTHER
AND HER MOTHER BEFORE HER.  YES, AND GREAT GRANDMOTHER.
AND GREAT GRANDMOTHER.
WHO HAD BEEN BORN A SLAVE.  BEEN BORN A SLAVE.
DO YOU FEEL THAT  YOU'RE CARRIED BY THAT?
ABSOLUTELY,  AND I'M RESPONSIBLE TO THEM.
MAYA HAS SPOKEN OFTEN  ABOUT THAT RESPONSIBILITY.
LISTEN TO THIS FROM 2003.
IMAGINE IT. JUST IMAGINE.
ANY OF US,  IF WE COULD REALLY THINK OF
OUR GREAT GRANDFATHERS  AND GRANDMOTHERS,
AND IF  PUT THEM  RIGHT IN FRONT OF US TODAY
AND SAY, "HERE YOU ARE.
"ARE YOU PLEASED WITH  WHAT I'M DOING WITH MY LIFE?
"AM I MAKING YOU PROUD?
AM I DOING ALL  YOU WOULD LIKE ME TO BE DOING?"
BECAUSE A PERSON COULD SAY,
"YOU'RE THE REASON  I CAME OVER HERE ON THAT BOAT.
YOU'RE THE REASON  I STOOD ON THE AUCTION BLOCK.
YOU'RE THE R I STUCK IT SO  THAT YOU COULD EXIST."
SUDDENLY,  LIFE ITSELF IS RICHER.
SO, WHEREVER I AM,
I STAND ON THE STAGE  IN FRONT OF 10,000 PEOPLE,
MY GREAT GRANDMOTHER  STANDS THERE WITH ME.
MM-HMM.
THAT'S THE LINE IN THE POEM,  "GRANDMOTHERS,"
THAT YOU WROTE   ONE OF MY FAVORITES.
I COME AS ONE,
"I STAND AS TEN THOUSAND."  "I STAND AS TEN THOUSAND."
OH, MY GOSH.
I USE THAT LINE  FOR MYSELF INTERNALLY
ON MANY AN OCCASION.
YES, BECAUSE  THAT'S WHO YOU ARE.
I'VE RECITED THAT TO MYSELF  MANY TIMES.
"I COME AS ONE,  BUT I STAND AS TEN THOUSAND."
THAT'S IT.  YEAH.
YOU GIRL.
THE FORCE OF THAT.  THAT'S IT.
YES, MA'AM.  THE FORCE OF THAT.
TO KNOW THAT  NONE OF US ARE ALONE.
NO, EVER.
'CAUSE YOU'VE BEEN  PAID FOR!
ALREADY.
ALREADY.  THANK THE LORD.
[ LAUGHS ]
COMING UP, WE ALL KNOW  SHE'S FULL OF LIFE LESSONS,
BUT WHICH ONE  IS MAYA ANGELOU'S FAVORITE?
EVERYBODY WHO QUOTES YOU,  AND I QUOTE YOU,
AND THEN THEY  QUOTE ME THROUGH YOU AND ALL.
WHAT DO YOU THINK IS
THE BEST PCE OF ADVICE  YOU'VE GIVEN?
WELL, HMM.
HMM.
MAYA'S ANSWER
WHEN "SUPER SOUL SUNDAY"  RETURNS.
PLUS, WHAT YOU,  OUR SUPER SOULERS,
WANT TO SAY TO MAYA ANGELOU.
WE'LL BE BACK IN A MOMENT.
Oprah: YOU KNOW,  I LOVED SHARING MAYA'S WISDOM
ON THE "OPRAH" SHOW  OVER ALL THESE YEARS,
AND OF ALL THE LESSONS  I'VE LEARNED IN MY LIFE,
THIS ONE'S AT THE VERY TOP  OF MY "MAYA LIST."
WHEN PEOPLE SHOW YOU  WHO THEY ARE,
BELIEVE THEM.  Angelou: YES.
ABSOLUTELY.
A PERSON SAYS TO YOU,
"I'M SELFISH,"
OR, "I'M MEAN,"
OR, "I AM UNKIND."
OR, "I'M CRAZY."
BELIEVE THEM   THEY KNOW THEMSELVES
MUCH BETTER THAN YOU DO.  MM-HMM.
IN 2000,  WHEN YOU WERE 72,
I INTERVIEWED YOU  FOR THE MAGAZINE,
AND I ASKED YOU  IF YOU CONSIDERED YOURSELF WISE,
AND AT THE TIME, YOU ANSWERED,  "WELL, I'M EN ROUTE."
THAT'S TRUE.
AND HOW WOULD YOU  ANSWER THAT NOW?
I'M EN ROUTE.  YOU'RE STILL EN ROUTE?
I'M FURTHER ALONG  THAN I WAS.
[ BOTH LAUGH ]
BUT I'M STILL EN ROUTE.
MM-HMM.
I DON'T KNOW  WHEN I KNOW ENOUGH.
I KNOW I KNOW A LOT,
AND I'M GRATEFUL FOR THAT.
I KNOW ENOUGH TO TRY TO
TO LIVE WHAT I KNOW.
MM-HMM.  NOW, THAT'S A LOT.
WHOA, THAT'S A LOT.
BUT I STILL  DON'T HAVE IT ALL.
WHAT DO YOU THINK  THAT YOU, MAYA ANGELOU
EVERYBODY WHO QUOTES YOU,  AND I QUOTE YOU,
AND THEN THEY  QUOTE ME THROUGH YOU AND ALL.
WHAT DO YOU THINK IS
THE BEST PCE OF ADVICE  YOU'VE GIVEN?
WELL, HMM.
HMM.
WELL, I'M THINKING THAT
THE BEST ADVICE  I'VE EVER GIVEN, I HOPE,
WAS THAT  WHICH I GAVE TO MY SON
WHEN HE WAS GROWING UP.
HE SAID,  "I DON'T HAVE ANY FRIENDS.
HOW CAN I  GET SOME FRIENDS?"
AND ALTHOUGH  I WAS VERY YOUNG,
I TOLD HIM TWO THINGS.
I TOLD HIM,  IN ORDER TO GET A FRIEND,
YOU HAVE TO BE A FRIEND   BE READY TO BE A FRIEND.
AND ALSO, I TOLD HIM,
THERE'S A PLACE IN YOU  THAT YOU MUST KEEP INVIOLATE.
YOU MUST KEEP IT  PRISTINE, CLEAN,
SO THAT  NOBODY HAS THE RIGHT TO
CURSE YOU  OR TREAT YOU BADLY.
NOBODY, NO MOTHER, FATHER,  NO WIFE, NO HUSBAND, NOBODY,
BECAUSE THAT MAY BE  THE PLACE YOU GO TO
WHEN YOU MEET GOD.
YOU HAVE TO HAVE  A PLACE THAT YOU SAY,
"STOP IT, BACK UP."
NOT HERE, YOU WON'T.  NOT  NO.
ABSOLUTELY.
AND THAT'S ONE I TOLD YOU  25 YEARS AGO.
YES.  SAY, "NO," WHEN IT'S NO.
YEAH.  SAY SO. BACK IT UP.
BECAUSE THAT PLACE  HAS TO REMAIN CLEAN AND CLEAR.
AND THAT HAS TO BE  A PLACE WITHIN YOURSELF.
YES, MA'AM.  YEAH.
THAT IS THE BEST ADVICE.
I KNOW EVERYBODY WHO'S WATCHING  IS GONNA SAY,
"WHEN PEOPLE SHOW YOU  WHO THEY ARE, BELIEVE THEM."
THAT'S ALSO VERY GOOD.
IT IS GOOD, NOW.  YEAH.
BUT NOTHING TOPS  HAVING THE PLACE INSIDE YOURSELF
THAT NOBODY ELSE  HAS A RIGHT TO INVADE.
NO.  YES.
AND WHEN THE PERSON COMES  WITH RUDE LANGUAGE TO YOU,
OR INVASIVE LANGUAGE  TO YOU,
YOU HAVE TO BE ABLE TO SAY,  "BACK UP.
"NOT ME, YOU DON'T.
DON'T YOU KNOW  I'M A CHILD OF GOD?"
WHAT IS THE BEST PCE OF ADVICE  YOU'VE EVER GOTTEN?
MM, SO MANY GOOD THINGS.
[ LAUGHS ] I KNOW.  YEAH.
I GUESS THE GREATEST ADVICE  IS TO FORGIVE.
I DON'T  ANOINT IT WITH ANYTHING.
I JUST FORGIVE IT.
BUT DON'T WE FORGIVE
I'VE TRIED TO  LET PEOPLE KNOW ON THE SHOW,
AS YOU HAVE TAUGHT ME  OVER THE YEARS THAT,
WHEN YOU FORGIVE SOMEBODY,  IT DOESN'T MEAN
YOU WANT TO SIT DOWN  AND INVITE THEM TO YOUR TABLE.
OH, NO.  NO, NO, NO, NO.
INDEED, NOT.  MM-HMM.
I JUST MEAN,  "I'M FINISHED WITH YOU."
"I'M DONE."  "YOU CAN GO AWAY."
YES.  YES, "YOU GO AWAY."
NOW, I DON'T  I DON'T SAY  GO AWAY AND HARM SOMEBODY ELSE,
BUT I DO HAVE TO  PROTECT MYSELF.
I LOOK LIKE A NINNY IF I  ASK SOMEBODY ELSE TO PROTECT ME,
AND I'M NOT WILLING TO  PROTECT MYSELF.
YEAH, THAT'S ONE OF  THE GREAT LESSONS
THAT YOU'VE TAUGHT ME,  TOO.
YOU'VE GOT TO BE WILLING TO  TAKE CARE OF THIS FIRST.
YES, MA'AM.  THEN YOU HAVE ENOUGH
TO GIVE TO OTHER PEOPLE.  YES, MA'AM.
COMING UP, WE'RE GOING  SOUL-TO-SOUL WITH MAYA ANGELOU.
DR. ANGELOU,  WHAT IS YOUR DEFINITION OF GOD?
OOH.
BUT FIRST,  WE ASK YOU, OUR SUPER SOULERS,
HOW MAYA HAS TOUCHED YOUR LIVES,
AND HERE'S WHAT  A FEW OF YOU HAD TO SAY.
Tiffaney:  "I FELL IN LOVE WITH WORDS
"AFTER READING 'I KNOW WHY  THE CAGED BIRD SINGS,'
"AND FROM THAT MOMENT,  I WAS INTRODUCED TO
MY BEST FRIEND...POETRY."
Christopher:  "DR. ANGELOU, YOU SHOWED ME
"HOW CAPABLE I REALLY AM.
"THROUGH WELL-SPOKEN WORDS  AND A FEARLESS LIFE,
"YOU TAUGHT ME POSSIBILITY.
YOU TAUGHT ME HOW TO DREAM."
Taryn: "YOU PUSHED ME TO  BLAZE NEW PATHS FOR MYSELF
"AND CONSTANTLY CHALLENGE  MY OWN LEVELS OF COMFORT.
"YOU MADE ME WANT TO  TELL A STORY
"THE WAY THAT YOU DID.
YOU MADE ME WANT TO HAVE  A STORY TO TELL, AND I DO."
Nola: "DEAR DR. MAYA ANGELOU,
"WE ARE ALL  YOUR EXTENDED FAMILY,
"YOUR DAUGHTERS AND SONS,
"AND YOU,  OUR GIFTED LITERARY MOTHER.
WITH PEACE AND BLESSINGS, NOLA."
Oprah:  WHAT HAS MAYA MEANT TO YOU?
TWEET ME USING 23LoveMaya
OR POST ON OUR FACEBOOK PAGE.
"SUPER SOUL SUNDAY"  WILL BE RIGHT BACK.
DR. ANGELOU,  WHAT IS YOUR DEFINITION OF GOD?
OOH.
[ LAUGHS ]  HMM.
ALL.
IF I COULD SAY
IF I WAS ASKED,  SAY IT IN
YOUR DEFINITION OF GOD  IN ONE WORD,
IT WOULD BE, "ALL."
A-L-L.
I LOVE THAT.
THERE IS NO PLACE  THAT GOD IS NOT.
NO PLACE.
IN THE PRISON,
IN THE CHOIR LOFT.
ON MY KNEES,  GOD IS RIGHT THERE.
ALL.  GOD IS ALL.
ARE THERE MANY WAYS  TO GET TO HIM?
I THINK SO, AS MANY WAYS  AS THERE ARE, ABSOLUTELY.
LIKE THE WAY,  THE HIGHWAYS THAT GO TO ROME,
BUT ALL ROADS LEAD TO GOD.  YES.
WHAT DO YOU BELIEVE HAPPENS  WHEN YOU DIE?
OH, I GO BACK TO ALL.
[ BOTH LAUGH ]
THAT'S ALL.  YOU GO BACK TO ALL?
YES. I'M IN ALL RIGHT NOW,  I JUST GO BACK TO ALL.
GO BACK TO ALL?  YES, ANOTHER
IT'S JUST ANOTHER WAY  OF BEING IN THE ALL.
YES, AND IT'S  SO INTERESTING,
'CAUSE YOU'RE  THE FIRST PERSON
THAT SAID TO ME  IN A WAY I REALLY GOT
THAT THERE ARE  AS MANY LEVELS
YOU SAID THAT EVERYBODY THINKS  THAT THERE'S JUST ONE WAY.
THERE'S NOT JUST ONE GATE.
THERE ARE AS MANY GATES  AS THERE ARE PEOPLE.
THERE ARE AS MANY GATES  AS ARE PEOPLE.
AND THEN  DR. EBEN ALEXANDER'S BOOK,
"IN PROOF OF HEAVEN."  OH, YES.
HE TALKS ABOUT ALL OF  THE DIFFERENT, MULTIPLE LEVELS.
EXACTLY.  YES.
I LOVE THAT BOOK,  BY THE WAY.
AND THEN TO FIND  AND TO SEE HIM ON "SUPER SOUL"
JUST KNOCKED MY SOCKS OFF.  [ LAUGHS ]
AMAZING.
WHAT DO YOU CALL  THE SOUL?
WHAT IS IT?
WHAT IS THE SOUL?
THE SOUL IS THE SPIRIT
WHICH LONGS FOR ALL.
OOH.
AND THAT SPIRIT  THEN USES ITSELF
TO CREATE THE BLUES
AND GOSPEL MUSIC
AND POP MUSIC AND HIP-HOP.
IT'S THAT SPIRIT  THAT LONGS,
THAT SAYS,
"LET ME SAY SOMETHING
"WHICH WILL HELP ME,  LEAD ME TO ALL,
"WHETHER THE POETRY IS  THE POETRY OF NIKKI GIOVANNI,
"SONIA SANCHEZ,
"OR WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
"OR MAYA ANGELOU,
EUGENE REDMOND."
THE POETRY.
I WRITE IT  SO I CAN GET CLOSER TO ALL.
LET ME TELL SO MUCH TRUTH.
NOT FACTS, BECAUSE  FACTS CAN OBSCURE THE TRUTH.
MM-HMM.  YOU TELL SO MANY FACTS
THE PLACES WHERE,  THE PEOPLE WHO,
TIMES WHEN,  THE REASONS WHY,
BLAH, BLAH, BLAH,
NEVER GETTING TO  THE TRUTH.
SO, I WANT TO  TELL THE TRUTH IN MY WORK.
AND IT WILL HELP ME,  LEAD ME CLOSER TO ALL.
AND IS  DO YOU SEE
I REMEMBER RAINN WILSON  WAS ON "SUPER SOUL SUNDAY,"
AND HE SAID THAT ART IS  ANOTHER FORM OF PRAYER.
OF COURSE.
YEAH, YOU SEE THAT, TOO?  EXACTLY.
THAT'S WHY  YOU TRY YOUR BEST
TO SAY THE RIGHT THING,  THE TRUE THING.
MM-HMM.  THE GOOD THING.
BECAUSE YOU'RE AN ARTIST,
AND YOU'RE USING  GOD ITSELF
TO HELP YOU TO GET TO GOD.
OH, YES.
HOW DO YOU DEFINE  SPIRITUALITY
VERSUS RELIGION?
OH, RELIGION  IS LIKE A MAP.
IT CAN HELP YOU TO SEE
HOW TO GET  WHERE YOU WANT TO GO.
ALL IT DOES  IS SHOW YOU HOW TO GET THERE.
IT'S ONLY A MAP.  YEAH.
AND SPIRITUALITY FOR YOU  MEANS...?
OH.
SURRENDER.
I SURRENDER ALL TO ALL.
COMING UP,  I KNEW MAYA WOULD HAVE
A GREAT RESPONSE  TO THIS QUESTION.
WHAT DOES PRAYER  MEAN TO YOU?
OH, I KNOW  YOU'RE A PRAYING WOMAN.
I'M A PRAYING WOMAN.  YOU'RE A PRAYING WOMAN.
PLUS, MAYA ANGELOU'S  PROFOUND WORDS
THAT INSPIRED A NATION.
LIFT UP YOUR EYES  UPON THIS DAY BREAKING FOR YOU.
GIVE BIRTH AGAIN TO THE DREAM.
WELL, WHEN YOU WROTE IT,  I WANT TO KNOW
HEAR FROM YOUR MOUTH
WHY YOU KNOW  THE CAGED BIRD SINGS.
THE CAGED BIRD SINGS  BECAUSE IT MUST.
IT MUST OR DIE.
MAYBE IT MUST  ANDDIE.  I DON'T KNOW.
BUT IT MUST SING.
SOMETIMES, THE MELODY  ARRIVED AT IN THE CAGE
IS MUCH MORE FETCHING,  MUCH MORE APPEALING,
MUCH MORE PROFOUND,  MUCH MORE POIGNANT,
THAN THE MELODY ARRIVED AT
BY THE BIRD  WHO'S ON THE LOOSE.
THE CAGED BIRD  SINGS WITH A FEARFUL TRILL.
ITS SONG IS HEARD  ON THE DISTANT HILL,
FOR THE CAGED BIRD  SINGS OF FREEDOM.
FREEDOM.
AND SO, THERE'S SOMETHING  UNIVERSAL ABOUT THAT SONG,
SINCE ALL OF US ARE CAGED  IN SOME WAY OR ANOTHER,
AND SO, PEOPLE CAN HEAR IT  AND SAY,
"OH, YES, OH, LORD,  LET THAT BIRD OUT."
Oprah: "SUPER SOUL SUNDAY"  WILL BE BACK IN A MOMENT.
WHAT DOES PRAYER  MEAN TO YOU?
OH, I KNOW  YOU'RE A PRAYING WOMAN.
I'M A PRAYING WOMAN.  YOU'RE A PRAYING WOMAN.
YES, I AM.  YEAH.
SO, WHEN YOU SAY TO ME
THERE HAVE BEEN TIMES  YOU'VE SAID TO ME,
"I'M PRAYING FOR YOU."  MM-HMM.
"AND I'M PRAYING WITH YOU."
I KNOW  I'M GONNA BE ALL RIGHT.
[ LAUGHS ] I KNOW.  I KNOW.
IT CHANGES THINGS.
AND YOU'RE CONNECTED.  YES, I AM.
AND I THANK GOD FOR THAT.
I KNOW THAT, WHEN I PRAY,
SOMETHING WONDERFUL  HAPPENS.
NOT JUST TO THE PERSON  OR PERSONS FOR WHOM I'M PRAYING,
BUT ALSO SOMETHING WONDERFUL  HAPPENS TO ME.
I'M GRATEFUL  THAT I'M HEARD.
MM.
'CAUSE YOU KNOW  ALL HEARS IT ALL.
THAT'S IT.
WHERE DO YOU FEEL  MOST AT HOME
OR AT PEACE  WITH YOURSELF?
WITH MYSELF?
IN MYSELF.
ALWAYS,  WHEN I'M IN MYSELF.
THAT IS TO SAY,
I'M AT PEACE WITH YOU.
I'M AT PEACE WITH  40,000 CAMERAS ZOOMING AROUND,
THAT'S FINE.
I'M AT PEACE IN MY BUS.
I'M AT PEACE STANDING  IN FRONT OF AN AUDIENCE,
AS I DID  A COUPLE OF WEEKS AGO,
FOR 10,000 PEOPLE.
I'M AT PEACE.
ONCE I KNOW I AM CENTERED,
IN GOD, I LIVE AND MOVE  AND HAVE MY BEING.
I'M ALL RIGHT, JACK.
I'M ALL RIGHT.
NOW, WHEN I LOSE IT,
AS YOU DO LOSE IT  FROM TIME TO TIME
IT IS HUMAN, I THINK
IT'S UNFORTUNATE,  BUT THERE WE ARE.
SO, FAITH TREMBLES
AND SKIDS AWAY.
AND SO, FOR THAT MOMENT,
I'M DANGEROUS,  AND I'M IN DANGER.
YES.
BUT AS SOON AS  I MAKE THE STATEMENT,
"IN GOD, I LIVE AND MOVE  AND HAVE MY BEING," I'M FINE.
I THANK YOU.  I'M FINE.
AND I USE THAT PHRASE   I USE THAT TO CALM MYSELF.
THAT IS MY LIVING MANTRA  FOR MYSELF.
IN ALL  DIFFICULT SITUATIONS.
AND IN ALSO GOOD ONES,  I USE, "IN GOD, I MOVE."
'CAUSE WHEN YOU USE IT  IN GOOD TIMES,
THE ALL IS PLEASED,  'CAUSE IT KNOWS THAT
YOU KNOW THAT YOUR GOOD TIMES  WERE BECAUSE OF IT.
YES, THAT'S RIGHT.
YES, SO,  YOU'RE JUST SAYING "THANK YOU."
THANK YOU.
AND WHAT DO YOU KNOW FOR SURE,  MAYA ANGELOU?
I KNOW FOR SURE  THAT LOVE SAVES ME,
AND THAT IT IS HERE  TO SAVE US ALL.
I KNOW IT'S A SENSE.
IT'S MORE CLOSE TO US  THAN AIR.
MORE  MORE LOUD TO US  THAN HEARING.
MM-HMM.
I KNOW IT.
I KNOW THAT  WE CAN SIT IN IT.
YES, LOVE, HONEY.
AND YOU KNOW BY THAT,  I DON'T MEAN MUSH, OR ANY
I DON'T MEAN ROMANCE.  OR SENTIMENTALITY.
I DO NOT, NO, MA'AM.
I MEAN  SOMETHING IS SO
IT CAN RAISE THE DEAD.
IT CAN RAISE THE DEAD?  YES, MA'AM.
IT CAN  MAKE A MOUNTAIN MOVE.
I KNOW IT.
I HAVEN'T DONE IT,  BUT I KNOW IT.
AS SURELY AS  I'M SITTING HERE.
MM-HMM, MM-HMM.
WELL, THAT'S WHAT  YOU'VE GIVEN TO ME, ALWAYS.
I THANK YOU, MY DARLING.  I LOVE YOU.
I LOVE YOU,  AND YOU KNOW IT.
[ LAUGHS ]  THANK YOU.
Oprah: IN 1993,
PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON  HANDPICKED MAYA ANGELOU
TO READ A POEM  AT HIS FIRST INAUGURATION.
SHE WAS ONLY  THE SECOND POET IN HISTORY
TO RECEIVE SUCH AN HONOR,
THE FIRST BEING ROBERT FROST  IN 1961.
I CAN THINK OF NO BETTER WAY  TO END TODAY'S SHOW
THAN WITH SOME OF MAYA'S  PROFOUND WORDS
FROM "ON THE PULSE OF MORNING."
Angelou: "LIFT UP YOUR FACES,  YOU HAVE A PIERCING NEED
"FOR THIS BRIGHT MORNING  DAWNING FOR YOU.
"HISTORY,  DESPITE ITS WRENCHING PAIN,
"CANNOT BE UNLIVED,
"BUT IF FACED WITH COURAGE,
"NEED NOT BE LIVED AGAIN.
"LIFT UP YOUR EYES  UPON THIS DAY BREAKING FOR YOU.
"GIVE BIRTH AGAIN TO THE DREAM.
"WOMEN, CHILDREN, MEN,
"TAKE IT  INTO THE PALMS OF YOUR HANDS,
"MOLD IT INTO THE SHAPE  OF YOUR MOST PRIVATE NEED.
"SCULPT IT INTO THE IMAGE  OF YOUR MOST PUBLIC SELF.
"LIFT UP YOUR HEART.
"EACH NEW HOUR HOLDS  NEW CHANCES FOR A NEW BEGINNING.
"DO NOT BE  WEDDED FOREVER TO FEAR,
"YOKED ETERNALLY TO BRUTISHNESS.
"THE HORIZON LEANS FORWARD,
"OFFERING YOU SPACE  TO PLACE NEW STEPS OF CHANGE.
"HERE, ON THE PULSE  OF THIS FINE DAY,
"YOU MAY HAVE THE COURAGE  TO LOOK UP AND OUT AND UPON ME,
"THE ROCK, THE RIVER,  THE TREE, YOUR COUNTRY.
"NO LESS TO MIDAS  THAN THE MENDICANT.
"NO LESS TO YOU NOW  THAN THE MASTODON THEN.
"HERE, ON THE PULSE  OF THIS NEW DAY,
"YOU MAY HAVE THE GRACE  TO LOOK UP AND OUT
"AND INTO YOUR SISTER'S EYE
"AND INTO YOUR BROTHER'S FACE,
"YOUR COUNTRY,
"AND SAY, SIMPLY, VERY SIMPLY,
"WITH HOPE,
GOOD MORNING."
[ CHEERS AND APPLAUSE ]
Oprah: GOOD MORNING, MAYA.
I'LL SEE ALL OF YOU NEXT SUNDAY.
ALL RIGHT,  I'M GONNA SIT HERE.
RIGHT HERE.
THE TWO OF US?  YEAH.
ALL RIGHT.
[ CAMERA SHUTTER CLICKING ]  THANK YOU. THANK YOU.
THIS IS LIKE THE PHOTOGRAPH  OF ME AND MY MOM.
[ LAUGHS ]
YOU KNOW,  IN THE FRONT OF THE BOOK.
YEAH, CAN YOU DO THIS?  YES.
SEND IT TO ME  FOR TWEETABILITY.
[ LAUGHS ]
THANK YOU.  THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
I LOVE YOU.  I LOVE YOU, SO DEARLY.